#summary Instructions to use Motif Analysis module

= Motif Analysis =

Command: *rgt-motifanalysis*

Analysis options: 

*enrichment* - 
Performs fisher exact test with multiple testing correction on MPBSs found on specific coordinates, concerning the enrichment for a specific set of genes.

*matching* - 
Searches for motif instances on the genome using different algorithms.

= Enrichment Analysis =

The basic input for this analysis are coordinates in which the enrichment will be tested. Additionally, a list of genes and motifs can be given in order to narrow the enrichment analysis. Bellow, the procedure is explained in details. The explanation focuses on the default parameters, but they can be changed.

== Method ==

First, the given coordinates are associated with genes. This association is made by considering promoter-proximal regions, i.e. coordinates that are within 1000 bp of each gene's TSS (labeled as PROX); the gene body, i.e. coordinates that are inside the genes (also labeled as PROX); and distal regions, i.e. coordinates that are within 50,000 bp of each gene's 3' or 5' ends (labeled as DIST). If a list of genes is provided, the association is made only with the genes in the list. Otherwise, the association is made with all genes from the selected organism. Aditionally, there is an option not to associate coordinates with genes and use all coordinates to perform the enrichment.

After the association, motif occurrences are searched (using 405 primary motifs from Jaspar & Uniprobe) inside the coordinates that were associated with at least 1 gene (labeled ev) and the coordinates that were not associated with any gene (labeled nev). The motif matching is done using Biopython's motif matching implementation and uses a False Positive Rate (FPR)-based approach to determine the cutoff for each motif (FPR = 10^(-4)). Also, regularizing factors can be added to every nucleotide in every position of the PWMs used for matching.

Additionally, motif matching is performed inside random genomic regions (labeled rand) with the same coordinate length as the input coordinate file. The number of peaks from this random set can be controlled.

With these information, two enrichment tests can be performed. The ev set is considered the positive set and the nev/rand sets are considered the negative sets. To perform the enrichment, four metrics are calculated for each transcription factor:

  * A = number of positive coordinates in which there is at least one occurrence of target motif.<br>
  * B = number of positive coordinates in which there is no occurrence of target motif. <br>
  * C = number of negative coordinates in which there is at least one occurrence of target motif. <br>
  * D = number of negative coordinates in which there is no occurrence of target motif.

After performing the fisher test for all motifs, p-values are corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini & Hochberg method.

== Input ==

==== Required Input: ====

|| `-coord_file=<FILE>` || Coordinate file containing the regions of the genome where the motif matching will be performed. If None, -assoc_coord_file option must be used.<br>Format: bed.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-motif_list=<FILE>` || Motif list file containing the factors that will be tested, split by line break. If None, uses entire dataset defined in -pwm_dataset.<br>Format: plain text.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-gene_list=<FILE>` || Gene list file containing the genes that will consist the enriched set. If None, considers entire coordinate file as enriched.<br>Format: plain text.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-assoc_coord_file=<FILE>` || Coordinate file already annotated with the enriched genes. Check full documentation for annotation format. If None, uses -coord_file, -gene_list and -association_file options to generate coordinate-gene association. Otherwise, ignores -coord_file and -gene_list options.<br>Format: bed.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-mpbs_file=<FILE1[,FILE2,...,FILEN]>` || Motif matching files containing the motif predicted binding sites. The name of the file is considered as the name of the factor. If None, uses -motif_list  and -pwm_dataset options or -mpbs_final_file option. Otherwise, ignores -motif_list option.<br>Format: bed.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-mpbs_final_file=<FILE>` || Motif matching file containing the motif predicted binding sites in the correct format for it to be separated in evidence / non-evidence and randomic sets.<br>Format: bed.<br>Default: None.||

==== Optional Input: ====
|| `-genome_list=<FILE1[,FILE2,...,FILEN]>` || List of files containing the genomic sequences in fasta format. Each chromosome must be put in the header, as in UCSC format.<br>Format: fasta.<br>Default: Use version in server (hg19).||
|| `-association_file=<FILE>` || File containing the location of all genes. The gene name must be the same as the ones in gene_list option. Check full documentation for more details on format.<br>Format: bed.<br>Default: Use version in server (hg19).||
|| `-chrom_sizes_file=<FILE>` || File containing the total length of each chromosome. It is a plain text file containing the chromosome name and the length in each line, separated by tab.<br>Format: plain text.<br>Default: Use version in server (hg19).||
|| `-pwm_dataset=<PATH>` || Path containing PWM files in jaspar format. Each file name is considered as the factor name.<br>Format: jaspar.<br>Default: Use version in server.||
|| `-logo_location=<PATH>` || Path that contains png images representing motif logos. Each file must contain the same name of the respective factor inside -pwm_dataset.<br>Format: png.<br>Default: Use version in server.||
|| `-random_coordinates=<FILE>` || File containing the random coordinates for fisher test. If None, create random coordinates. The number of coordinates equals the size of the input coordinates file x -rand_proportion_size.<br>Format: png.<br>Default: None.||

==== Input Parameters: ====
|| `-organism=<STRING>` || Organism considered on the analysis. Can be 'hg19' or 'mm9'. All the default files are going to be based on the chosen organism.<br>Default: hg19.||
|| `-motif_match_fpr=<FLOAT>` || False positive rate cutoff for motif matching.<br>Default: 0.0001.||
|| `-motif_match_precision=<INT>` || Score distribution precision for motif matching.<br>Default: 10000.||
|| `-motif_match_pseudocounts=<FLOAT>` || Pseudocounts to be added to raw counts of each PWM.<br>Default: 0.1.||
|| `-multiple_test_alpha=<FLOAT>` || Alpha value for multiple test.<br>Default: 0.05.||
|| `-promoter_length=<INT>` || Length of the promoter region (in bp) considered on the creation of the coordinate-gene association.<br>Default: 1000.||
|| `-maximum_association_length=<INT>` || Maximum distance between a coordinate and a gene (in bp) in order for the former to be considered associated with the latter.<br>Default: 50000.||
|| `-cobinding=<INT1[,INT2,...,INTN]>` || Number of cobinding combinations to test.<br>Default: None.||
|| `-cobinding_enriched_only=<Y|N>` || If Y then only enriched factors are tested for cobinding. If N, all factors are tested.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-enriched_pvalue=<FLOAT>` || P-value cutoff to consider a factor, or factor combination as enriched or not enriched.<br>Default: 0.05.||
|| `-rand_proportion_size=<FLOAT>` || If random coordinates need to be created, then it will be created a number of coordinates that equals this parameter x the number of input coordinates.<br>Default: 1.0.||
|| `-all_coord_evidence=<Y|N>` || If Y then all input coordinates will be considered as the evidence set, i.e. it will be performed only the coordinate vs. background analysis.<br>Default: N.||

====Output Options: ====
|| `-output_location=<PATH>` || Path where the output files will be written.<br>Default: current directory.||
|| `-print_association=<Y|N>` || Whether to output a bigbed file containing the coordinate-gene association + MPBSs that occured inside all coordinates.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_mpbs=<Y|N>` || Whether to output a bigbed file containing all MPBSs found on input and random coordinates.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_results_text=<Y|N>` || Whether to output the fisher test results in text format.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_results_html=<Y|N>` || Whether to output the fisher test results in html format.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_enriched_genes=<Y|N>` || Whether to output multiple files for each factor (or combination of factors) containing a list of enriched genes where a MPBS for that factor (or combination of factors) occured.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_rand_coordinates=<Y|N>` || Whether to output a bigbed file containing the random coordinates.<br>Default: Y.||
|| `-print_graph_mmscore=<Y|N>` || Whether to output graphs containing the motif matching score distribution for the MPBSs found on the input and random coordinates.<br>Default: N.||
|| `-print_graph_heatmap=<Y|N>` || Whether to output graphs containing heatmaps created based on the corrected p-values of the multiple testing.<br>Default: N.||

== Output ==

The basic output files are described below.

  * `coord_association` - A bed file containing all the coordinates and the genes associated to each coordinate. The genes can be seen in the NAME field of the bed file and are separated by colon. A dot can be seen in the coordinates that were not associated with any gene.
  * `mpbs` - Contains all Motif-Predicted Binding Sites (MPBSs) predicted with the motif matching procedure for all coordinates and random locations.
  * `rand` - Contains all random coordinates.
  * `<nev/rand>_<X>_statistics` - Statistics for the enrichment analysis. They are available in tab-delimited plain text (.txt) file and html file (for faster visualization). The information available is: factor name, p-value from fisher test, corrected p-value, A, B, C, D (see above what each letter means), percentage of positive coordinates with at least one occurrence of the motif (i.e. A/(A+B)), percentage of negative coordinates with at least one occurrence of the motif (i.e. C/(C+D)), genes (separated by comma in text file and a link to GO analysis in html file) associated with the positive coordinates in which there is at least one occurrence of the target motif.

= Motif Matching =

Searches for putative binding sites based only on sequence information.
Under construction.